What is Emotional Exhaustion?

Symptoms

Causes

Treatment

Outlook

The bottom line

Emotional exhaustion can result from regularly experiencing challenging events in your work or
personal life. Eliminating stressors and taking time out when possible can help.

Emotional exhaustion is a state of feeling emotionally worn out and drained due to accumulated stress
from one’s personal or work life, or a combination of both. It is one of the signs of burnout.

People experiencing emotional exhaustion often feel like they have no power or control over what
happens in life. They may feel “stuck” or “trapped” in a situation.

Over time, this chronic, stressed-out state can cause permanent damage to your health.

At challenging points in life, emotional exhaustion can sneak up on you, but it’s never too late to get
help.

What are the symptoms of emotional exhaustion?

The symptoms of emotional exhaustion can be both emotional and physical.

People experience emotional exhaustion differently, but generally symptoms include:

lack of motivation

trouble sleeping

irritability

physical fatigue

feelings of hopelessness

absentmindedness

apathy

headaches

change in appetite

nervousness

difficulty concentrating

irrational anger

increased cynicism or pessimism

sense of dread

depression

If you need someone to talk to

Emotional exhaustion, feelings of hopelessness, and a lack of life purpose can feel overwhelming. If
you’re having thoughts of suicide, call or text the toll-free 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at 988.

ADVERTISEMENT

Therapy That’s With You Through It All

Feeling overwhelmed, stuck, or stressed? We’re here for you. Fill out a short questionnaire, check your
coverage, and join over 6 million people worldwide who have found online support through BetterHelp.

Exclusive Offer: 20% off your first month

6 million+ helped

Average copay $23

Accepts HSA/FSA

Offer valid for new users only & cannot be combined with insurance. For eligible members, actual cost
may vary by plan, provider, and deductible status

What causes emotional exhaustion?

Experiencing some daily stress and anxiety is common, but over time, chronic stress can take a toll on
the body. Emotional exhaustion is caused by a long period of constant life stress, whether from
personal stress at home or stress related to work.

What triggers emotional exhaustion differs from person to person. What might be stressful for one
person can be completely manageable for another person.

Some more common triggers of emotional exhaustion include:

high-pressure jobs, such as nurses, doctors, and teachers

intense schooling, such as medical school

working long hours or working at a job you dislike

raising children

financial stress or poverty

being a caregiver for a loved one

prolonged divorce proceedings

death of a family member or friend

living with a chronic illness or injury

Sophia’s story: Emotional exhaustion

“I had been experiencing emotional exhaustion for years as a teacher. I had an impossibly high
workload, and there just weren’t enough hours in my working day to get everything done. So, I’d
regularly work into the late evening to plan lessons and get to school early to set up.

Looking back now, there were so many signs that I was emotionally exhausted and burnt out. I was
crying regularly, constantly drained, and skipping meals to make time for lesson planning. It got to a
point where I had developed severely low iron, which meant I was always falling ill.

Many of the children I taught were experiencing food insecurity and unsettled home lives. The school
district was already so underfunded, and as with most teachers, I took it on myself to fill these gaps,
almost taking on the role of a second parent to ensure children were safe and happy.

The type of exhaustion I felt wasn’t one that could be fixed with a good night’s sleep. It was deeper than
that. I felt physically, mentally, and emotionally drained… and deep down, I also knew my job was no
longer something I loved.”

How to treat emotional exhaustion

There are many lifestyle measures that can help alleviate symptoms of emotional exhaustion. These
techniques won’t be easy to carry out at first, but they’ll get easier as you begin to form healthier habits.

Making small changes in your daily habits can help manage your symptoms and prevent emotional
burnout.

Once you recognize the signs of emotional exhaustion, try the following:

Eliminate the stressor

While not always possible, the best way to treat stress is to eliminate the stressor. If your work
environment is the cause of your emotional exhaustion, consider asking for support in reducing
stressors. If your manager or boss is causing your stress, you can also consider transferring to a new
department or asking to be placed under a different manager.

Eat healthy

Eating healthy means choosing a balanced diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats,
while avoiding sugary snacks and fried or processed foods.

We’re told to eat healthy all the time, but it can make a world of difference when you’re stressed. Not
only will it help you get the vitamins and minerals you need, but it will also improve digestion, sleep, and
energy levels, which can have a domino effect on your emotional state.

Exercise

Any sort of physical activity raises endorphins and serotonin levels. This can improve your emotional
state. Exercise also helps take your mind off your problems. Try to exercise for 30 minutes per day,
even if it’s just a long walk.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that adults aim for a minimum of
150 minutesTrusted Source of moderate-intensity aerobic activity per week. You can achieve this by
exercising for 30 minutes, five days a week, through activities like:

brisk walking

cycling

dancing

gardening

hiking

yoga

Get enough sleep

Sleep is important for mental health. It’s even more effective if you plan your bedtime for roughly the
same time every night. It is recommended that adults aim for seven to nineTrusted Source hours of
sleep each night.

Developing a routine at bedtime can help you relax and ensure better quality sleep. Limiting caffeine
before bed can also have a positive impact on your sleep schedule.

Practice mindfulness

Mindfulness is a term you probably hear a lot, but mindfulness techniques are much more than just a
fad. They’re scientifically recognized to reduce stress and anxiety and can be the key to balancing your
emotions.

Mindfulness is the act of engaging with the present moment. This can help direct your attention away
from negative thinking. There are many ways to practice mindfulness. Examples include:

meditation

yoga

breathing exercises

going for a walk, especially in nature

keeping a journal to write down your feelings and thoughts

Connect with a trusted friend

Talking face to face with a friend is a wonderful way to relieve stress. The person listening doesn’t
necessarily have to fix your issues. They can just be a good listener. A trusted friend or family member
can listen without judging you.

If you don’t have anyone close to turn to, check if your employer has an employee assistance program
with counseling services.

Take a break

Everyone needs a break at some point. Whether you take a vacation or simply find the time to take
yourself out to the movies, every little bit helps.

Meet with a professional

Along with making lifestyle changes, it’s important to seek professional help to treat emotional
exhaustion. A professional, such as a therapist, can give you the tools you need to work through a
stressful period. Some of the techniques used by professionals include:

cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a form of psychotherapy, also known as talk therapy

applied relaxation techniques

Talk to your family doctor

In some cases, a healthcare professional may suggest medications to help manage your symptoms.
Antidepressants, such as selective-serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), anti-anxiety medications, or
prescription sleeping aids have been used to help treat emotional exhaustion.

Medications such as benzodiazepines can be addictive and should only be used on a short-term basis
to lower the risk of dependency or addiction.

Sophia’s story: Emotional exhaustion

“My turning point came toward the end of the school year, during my fourth year of teaching. I was
having my annual review with the headteacher, who asked me, ‘Where would you like to be this time
next year?‘ It was in that moment that it struck me. I wanted to be anywhere but here. I was not happy,
and unless something changed, I’d most likely leave teaching for good.

I broke down and ended up telling her how I had been feeling and how this had been impacting my
health. Luckily, she was beyond understanding and provided me with the support I needed to establish
better work-life boundaries, such as having weekly, nonnegotiable time away from the classroom to
plan lessons during school hours.

I was able to take some long-overdue rest over the summer break and return the next year with
stronger boundaries in place. This included prioritizing my core needs by ensuring I made time to eat all
my meals, get enough sleep, socialize, and pursue hobbies. I now know that as soon as these start
slipping, I’m venturing back into burnout territory.

Making these changes took time, but I stuck to them, and eventually, life started to feel good again. I
had forgotten that there were things that brought me joy outside of my career, and now I was finally
able to dedicate time and energy to them.”

